Thank you for meeting us today.
Um, I just put an apology in for our board chair.
Um, unfortunately she couldn't travel
and couldn't be with us here today.
Um, so this year, crown Infrastructure Delivery CID,
has made significant progress, um, in transitioning from,
um, the Christchurch focus organization
of delivering the Nanka projects,
following their Christchurch Earthquakes to a national, uh,
agency supporting crown entities
with their planning delivery,
and managing their critical
infrastructure across New Zealand.
Um, having completed, um, close to $1.1 billion of projects,
mainly in Christchurch.
Uh, CID now manages a diverse public sector portfolio
nationwide, uh,
addressing challenges like fragmented capability,
limited capacity, uh, duplicated effort,
and limited transparency.
Uh, we are recognized as a trusted, uh, agency,
excelling in all aspects of infrastructure delivery.
We support agencies through the entire
infrastructure lifecycle.
It includes planning and business case development, uh,
right through to asset management
and operational oversight, as well as our, um,
day-to-day bread and butter delivery
and management of infrastructure projects.
We are actively exploring broader opportunities, uh,
to support agencies where our expertise can strengthen, uh,
delivery capability and help lift performance across the
infrastructure system in the country.
We see real, uh, real system-wide value
and concentrated infrastructure expertise within an
agency like CID.
Uh, what what we see is that, um,
project Governors are supported with better data for, um,
for decision making, and we have, um, consistent proce, um,
consistent processes and,
and we provide stronger oversight in those
projects that we deliver.
By June, 2025,
we had $1.25 billion worth of projects underway.
Uh, we supported 12 clients across client agencies across 18
sites nationwide.
Our projects include the complex, uh, seismic upgrade
and end of life service replacement
at the Auckland District Court.
That building needs to remain operational while we
undertake our work there.
Uh, we're also supporting the building of the science center
at Kenna per for public health and forensic science,
and we're doing the design
and construction of the new biosecurity facility for NPI,
biosecurity New Zealand and Auckland.
In the first five months of this financial year,
we signed seven new cost recovery fee for service, uh,
agreements with new clients.
Uh, those new clients include Health New Zealand
for their rapid inpatient capacity extension program,
ministry for social of social development for business case
and governance support for their program,
developing facilities to cater
for intellectually disabled people who commit serious crime
and the New Zealand police
as they developed their property program, uh, business case.
Um, we're also really proud to have handed over Pat Kiri,
the recreation sports facility in Christchurch.
It's the last, the last of anchor projects in Christchurch,
and that's, uh, uh, we handed that
to Christchurch City Council at the end of October.
Uh, CID is now engaging with councils
and local government organizations to offer our support
and services, uh,
to help them manage their infrastructure needs effectively.
And we've recently began work with a little port company
for feasibility on a new office building,
and that's on top of the work that we're doing
with the Chatham Island Council, with their, um,
emergency services or,
and co-location of government services hub on the island.
Our mission is to build and maintain adaptable,
sustainable infrastructure for New Zealand.
We have high level of expertise and experience in this area,
and we have excellent systems and processes.
Our plan going forward is to work in partnership
with our client agencies, um, both in central
and local government, and to make a positive
and lasting difference
to New Zealand infrastructure system as the introduction.
Thanks for having us, and, um,
welcome with questions. Thank you
Very much. Right. Throwing up
questions. Just gonna gonna start me off,
Kerry. Thank you. Thank
you very much, uh, for
that and for coming in.
Um, I'm keen to pick up on a, um, statement that you've made
around your performance being linked to availability
of crown funded projects,
and also noting that there are only some agencies that work
with you and flow through to that point later.
I'm keen to understand, first of all,
if you've offered any advice around, uh, the impact of
either cutting or delaying, uh,
crown funded projects has had on the rollout and efficiency
and the performance that you're able to provide.
So we haven't had any, we don't provide any input into
what projects are cut or taken forward.
Um, if that's the,
I'm kind, obviously you provide a specialist service.
Yeah. And I'm keen to understand, given that expertise,
whether you've provided advice around impact
or concern around workforce retention, things
that the infrastructure sector more broadly
has raised publicly.
Yeah, so we've raised through conversations
and open forums with infrastructure commission, um, on
pipeline of projects in, uh, pipeline of projects
and the, the certainty that gives, um, sector
of what's coming forward.
But again, we can't influence those
projects that come to market.
No, no, that's fine. It's not,
but we, we, we, we provide kind of advice,
but it's, I think sector knows infrastructure commission
knows, ministers know, uh, the impact
of infrastructure on the sector.
Have you noticed any impact on your projects
that you are currently working on
around retaining the workforce?
Um, no. Look, I I, we haven't noticed a, a decline.
Um, we've got a lot of interest in the, the, uh,
the projects that we go up to tender for.
Mm-hmm. Um, so the sector is hungry, um,
that's both in the professional services
and in the, uh, construction market.
So there's, there's definitely
capacity in the market to do more.
Okay. Uh, and we're seeing that through our tenders.
Can I, do you mind if I carry on with that?
Uh, I'm keen to jump to the point I made earlier.
Um, it's clear that you believe that involving yourselves
with agencies to assist with their project delivery
provides efficiency.
Uh, therefore, can we extend that to think
that it's your view that other agencies, if they were
to join with you, then we would see further
efficiencies in the rollout infrastructure?
I think we're seeing it with other agencies that do, um,
uh, work with us.
So if I can just,
there's, there's two points I would like to make.
There are, there are mandated agencies that need to mm-hmm.
That must use us. So if they have an infrastructure need
and there's some rules and requirements around what they can
and can't do, they have to use us.
There are other agencies that aren't mandated to use us,
but if they have a capacity, uh, restraint
or restriction on, on delivering their infrastructure,
they can partner with us.
Health New Zealand is an example.
Ministry of Education is another one where there was a,
a capacity issue that we were able to fill a gap with them.
So they're seeing efficiencies in what they do.
Is that with the education, is that specifically the,
the increased role in Auckland in
The, so there was two projects that was, yeah,
that was the increased, uh,
short-term role growth program in Auckland.
We supported them with that. And we're also working
with the education on the, uh,
Wellington Girls College seismic great
program of their, their
Role. Okay. And, and,
but you're seeing it more on a project
by project basis as across
to across the Yeah, that'd be fair.
Do you expect that to then become the norm
and perhaps those two
agencies that you've worked with there?
Um, look as, as they're getting, uh, possibly more funding
through budget bids and their, their need
to deliver increases, I see there being an a,
a bigger opportunity for them to partner with us
to get more efficiencies out of their, um, their delivery.
What could the risk just generally speaking, be if, if,
if they chose not to?
Not them specifically, just speaking generally. Oh,
Look, I think we, uh,
I think slower infrastructure delivery
would be the obvious one.
I think we can help with increased capacity, uh,
within those agencies
or across government sector to deliver infrastructure.
Okay. Thank you. It's
Useful. Can I just pick
up on some of those?
So you've got, you've got a dozen, um, government agencies
who are basically told they will, they will work with you.
Um, raised health there, which is one of those agencies?
No, no.
Health, health New Zealand is not a mandated agency. Oh,
Okay. It's got, sorry,
ministry of Health, ministry of, okay.
So not health, sorry. Got Yep.
Um, education's not on that list either.
So those, so they're choosing to come,
they're choosing to come to you.
Okay. Yeah. So through through William Partnership,
you know, we, we reach out and we offer our services, um,
and we work together to arrange
the working arrangements for that.
So, so when, how are you measuring the satisfaction
of those agencies or of any of those agencies or,
and you mentioned local government as well.
How are you measuring the satisfaction of those agencies
with the services you provide?
And obviously one bit of satisfaction is as they come back
to you again and say, Hey, well, we'll,
we like that. We'll do it again.
Well, look, I think return, you know,
return business is definitely a, uh, a measure
of satisfaction, but we've also, we reach out to the
SROs within those, um, with pro within those agencies
and the project they're responsible for,
and we get direct feedback from those SROs.
And, and in this coming year, we're developing a client,
we're developing a client satisfaction survey for,
for next year to, well, that's
What I was, that what I was asking
Formally sort of measure that. Um, so,
So that, that's the first time that this has happened.
Its client satisfaction survey. Yep. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Previously it's just been informal feedback
and sort of testimonials and those sort of
Things. So
That's something that you'll be able to report back to.
Sure. Uh, in, in the next, uh, next time I'll take a couple
of questions before I go stick myself back on
again, Simon. And then again.
Thank you. Um, thanks so much.
Look, you can see how you built your book.
Uh, I'm really interested in, uh,
how you use program management and program
and project management approaches, uh,
to drive these efficiencies and get value for money.
Do you want to describe some of the ways you do that, uh,
that maybe aren't necessarily that
or haven't been that common in public sector delivery?
Uh, as, as much as they're in the private sector?
Um, look, I'd say, um, we have a,
a project support office, which is, uh, kind
of a centralized unit within our company where, um,
that does assurance across all our projects.
So they, the projects work with the PSO, um,
for scheduled risk reporting, um,
and also, uh, assurance on the projects, um, making sure
that we're complying
with their own internal management plans.
Um, our data and the, the reports that we deliver
or develop are, can be done in real time.
So if we need a real time risk assessment,
a QRA process on a project schedule or,
or financials, we can get
that done really quickly within our own organization.
So that brings, you know, I think
that brings really good best practice to, um, program
and project management.
That means that governors are both at, um,
our company level, but also at agency level and,
and ministerial and treasury level.
They, uh, they can get real time reporting.
They get accurate reporting every month.
So what are the, some of the key risks that, uh, you see
as common to public sector delivery that,
that you're identifying, uh, across the projects
or programs that you're working on?
Um, look, I'd say an observation would be inconsistency
of, of procurement and consistency of contract management.
Um, it's one thing that we do do well is the consistency
of, of both of those.
Um, so that those that tender
and do work for us, they know what they're getting in both,
you know, how we tender and how we,
how we monitor performance on contracts.
Okay. Thanks Sean. Juliet,
Um, thank you so much.
I was actually wondering, like, going forward
when public agencies are working with you,
are they, are you like directly charging them
for your assistance or, um, is some of it covered
by more general crown appropriation?
Um, So, um, so we've got a few clients
and a few projects that working on at the moment
that are covered by an appropriation.
So they're, um, historic ones,
but, sorry, can you up just a little bit please?
Sorry. Historic projects have been covered
by an appropriation and so like the likes of ministry
of Primary Industries, that's covered by an appropriation.
Uh, but all new projects
that we've signed up from this year onwards
are all cost recovery.
So we're charging agencies directly for, for that.
Okay. Do you, um, how are you working
or not with N fco?
Um, it seems like there's a few different agencies offering
advice to agencies about infrastructure.
Just wondering if like,
So, so we, we work closely with them
and talk to them a lot and communicate,
but we have slightly different sort of areas of focus.
So they're much more on the funding
and financing side of things.
Yeah. And we're much more on the delivery side of things,
but we, we, we communicate, we make sure
that when we're talking to clients, if they're actually
after a more of a, a NCO thing,
we'll, we'll direct them that way.
And, and likewise they do the same.
So sort of a, you know, mutually um, beneficial
and respectful relationship.
Do you think that, um, like directly charging
agencies is gonna have any impact on
demand to work with you?
Or, I mean, what are the, I guess, benefits
of having a more direct pricing as opposed to broader?
'cause it's all public money, right? Yeah.
Whether it's a broad appropriation or whether it's through
Yeah, I, I guess the real benefit is that, that it,
you know, clearly articulates the cost of a project.
So when, when the cost of a project
and doing the functions that we do, I,
I covered within an agency's sort
of over overall appropriation that time
and effort worked on the project as opposed
to other overheads and other costs.
So you more explicitly see it costs this much money
to do the delivery.
Um, but yeah, ultimately it is, it's public money
that's coming from, you know, how quite, how it gets to us
to pay the bills is, it's a sort
of public policy question rather than a question.
For us,
There is a, an element of risk
of agencies building their own
capability for one-off projects.
Um, you know, they can,
they can get people in quite often it's contractors at,
at much higher costs,
but also at the tail end of a project,
when the next project, um, somewhere else is on the, um,
is on the cards for those key people, they, they leave.
And so the, the agency loses that, um, that IP
and knowledge of the project and the closeout
of a project is often quite complex.
Um, where usually us, we have that, you know, consistency
of knowledge across the project
and, uh, personnel within the organization
that can see the project from very beginning to the very end
and hand over to the end agency.
Just to be clear before I go to Dan, so
what you're saying is in a lot of cases,
the agency itself does not have within its core
capabilities, um, the skills
to be able to deliver a project.
So they're contracting any way, it's just that in this,
they're now saying, well, we contract to you CID as opposed
to contacting to private sector.
They, they, They have to build their
own internal capability.
Yeah. So the internal owners internal capability can be
direct employees
or contractor specialist services particularly,
or like individuals, particularly
for large complex projects, they would,
you know, they could quite often
Struggle. And that's, that you're saying is vulnerability.
Yeah. Yeah. Dan,
Just, um, we've got this national,
national infrastructure pipeline.
Um, just wanting to understand, you know, the interplay
between your organization
and that in terms of forward planning, um, do,
does your organization have cutoffs on
what value projects they'll consider?
So you have mandated organizations that you work with,
others that you work with contractually.
Do you consider the size of the project
when considering whether to engage or,
Um, so, so we're open to working with,
with all agencies on all projects.
So we don't have a, you know, we prefer
and we've got a track record in, in larger projects, um,
sort of over that a hundred million sort of mark.
So a hundred million plus, but,
But, but we're open and we're currently working on
projects below that level as well.
Um, so, um, ideally when they're a bit smaller than that,
we try and package them up, um, together.
Um, so like the short term real growth for education,
if you put a few of those projects together,
the value goes up and you can drive some efficiencies.
Um, you know, it's the projects sort of management costs
of a, a one, one-off sort of two
or $3 million project, you know, are quite high,
but you build that into a larger value than the,
the overheads and the costs sort of spread across more.
So it makes more sense to both.
Thank you. Just going back to the previous point
around skills, um,
so I'm guessing you we're really practically talking about
project management, um, skills, engineering skills in-house.
If you don't have them, that's when you'll come to, um,
Yeah. Just to be
clear, like the engineering skills aren't in the
physical design of the, the building itself.
We would still, um, engage third party designers Okay.
For example. But we do have engineers in-house
because typically engineers make good project managers
and program managers and, um,
and so they oversee, um, you know, the makeup of our,
our teams, uh, that, you know, those very people,
project managers, right.
We've got an inhouse legal team as well, which do, um, our,
uh, specialists and construction law, contract law.
And so we draft our own contracts
and, um, we can, um, yeah, you know, deal
with those things without having to go externally
and pay some big money for external consultants for that.
Great. Um, lastly,
I'm the token aucklander on this committee.
Um, what? Oh, we, Simon there go Chris been divorced,
Chris, um, spoken
Geographically.
Yeah, exactly. I'm just curious on what,
what the work program you've got in Auckland
is, um, in terms of
Assisting on the infrastructure
Pipeline. Um, probably
value wise,
and look, take this, it, it's, it's a range.
It's Auckland District Court, uh, biosecurity,
uh, New Zealand is another one.
And we've got, um, the Health New Zealand Rapid, um,
inpatient bed.
So look, we're looking probably around 700 million,
800 million potentially
Up there. Exciting. Yeah.
Great. But other growth opportunities. Great.
Um, Julia? No, I, um, tangy first then Julia.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, in terms of the partner agencies that you've identified,
obviously the pipeline of, um,
infrastructure falls very heavily in the local
government space as well.
So what scope do you see, if any, on sort
of expanding into some of those local initiatives
that have a really core infrastructure component or part?
Um, do you see that there's been an opportunity to,
to work in that space?
And if so, where does that scope exist?
What some of the barriers might be?
Yeah, look, there is an opportunity and,
and you know, Richard could jump in here as well.
Um, uh, we, our, uh, we had
to get, um, ministerial, um, approval to go
and talk to local governments, which we, uh,
sought at the beginning of the year.
And the minister approved us engaging with local government.
We saw an opportunity to increase the, the, the services
that we could offer in local government.
Um, and, um, since we've started engaging with,
like I mentioned at my intro, uh, we are working
with the Chatham Islands Council with, uh, uh,
development at they're doing down there
and Little Report Company, which is a council
and organization in Christchurch.
Um, we are currently working out what our offering
to local gov, local government
and local councils looks like,
and that's a work stream that we're going on at the moment.
We have reached out to, um, mayors
and ES of, um, of councils offering our services
as an introductory, and we'll be following that up,
um, probably in the new year.
What we wanted to do is let the local body election settle,
get the, um, councils established,
and then we'd pick that up in the
new year. So that's the main.
In terms of your engagement in this space to date,
have you identified any particular funding constraints
that exist within the sector that might have an issue
with your ability to be able to sort of, um, lean into that,
that scope opportunity?
The, the funding like in central government is, is,
you know, hard to come by in local government as well,
so there's always constraints.
Um, and, but again, we don't sort of, you know, we,
we can't fix that problem, so we're just there to make sure
that, um, when there's projects that need delivery,
we can help them deliver them most efficiently
and effectively as they can.
Um, the, the funding questions are outside our scope.
I'm very sorry, and I,
do you mind bringing the
microphone slightly closer to you, please.
Thanks very much.
I, I certainly appreciate that.
Uh, if you can't hear, it's not much point is the Julianne.
Um, I, I had a couple of more
Questions and one was like, is there a risk
that the local government
or central government agencies
that need the most help don't have the funds or capacity?
I won't see that they have the funds
or capacity to engage in.
I don't think so. I guess that the mandate
that requires the number of agencies to work with us applies
to the smaller agencies.
Yeah. So the, the capital intensive agencies,
as we've talked about, health New Zealand Ministry
of Education, um,
and a couple of others aren't required to use us,
but increasingly they are seeing the value from using us.
Um, so there is a risk that if they don't choose to,
then they will keep doing the way things
have have been done in the past.
Um, but you know, that's,
that's getting increasingly better over time,
their performance in those spaces.
So
If you have more projects
or demand for your services than you have capacity,
how do you prioritize which ones you work on?
Oh, we, we would grow, um, if we can get
involved in a project early enough, like business case,
there's enough time for us to then see the,
it's a different team that does the business case
that does the actual delivery of the project.
So we would build our capacity to, to suit, um,
the demand. Um,
Are you working with N ZT at all?
NZTA, um, and not a mandated agency
and they've got a delivery capability?
So we haven't approached NGTA,
We've historically sort of focused more on the vertical
infrastructure, horizontal,
Sorry, can you be, just be clear. Sorry.
Sorry. We've historically focused more on the vertical
infrastructure field rather than the horizontal
infrastructure, but we're increasingly sort of moving into
that space and with the local government,
that's probably an area that they
might want some assistance with. So
Like with the water, water entities,
New water entities, Yeah,
we see that as an opportunity. That's useful. Thank you.
I've got, um, Kieran, Simon, David, thank you.
So in your report, you've got a list of the major projects
that you're, you're involved in.
Are any of those currently experiencing cost pressures?
No, they're not over budget.
There's, you know, you, you always have
to manage contingencies and project budgets,
but none of them are over budget.
Does that, in your opinion,
therefore demonstrate the benefits of applying
or working with you in projects such as this?
We would say yes. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. So to julianne's question earlier, in your opinion,
is there a potential benefit to partnering
with the likes of NZTA?
Um, look, I think we, yes.
Um, we have to be, uh, also careful about, you know,
we've got mandate agencies that we need that have to use us.
They are clients. We're, we're building our client base.
It's, it's so in time. Yeah, sure.
Um, uh, I don't think anything's off the table,
but, um, we, we have to just pick our paths, uh, as we grow,
you know, we're in year two now.
Mm-hmm. Uh, we have to be careful. We,
No one's gonna quote you as saying we do it better than
NZTA, that's alright,
but we're in, we're in private here for the committee
to understand
of what you provide.
Uh, and then it's for others to make those sorts of,
Yeah, again, the, the mandate would help.
Um, you know, the mandate has, has some boundaries and, and,
and, you know, we work with
those agencies within those boundaries.
Um, working with agencies outside of that, uh,
of the mandate, you know, it takes a one in partnership
to, to get those over lined.
And yeah. And as time is going on, the likes of education
and health are seeing the benefits now, uh,
and, uh, are starting to engage more.
Uh, you mentioned water earlier,
would you include local transport networks?
Uh, uh, that's one of the, one
of the local government things that we're looking at, yes.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Mr.
Is yours, is yours a sub off this?
Um, well, it's basic FaceTime.
They're all on the same space.
They're all like just a rolling sub.
Um, new creation.
You mentioned your involvement in business casing
and we often hear from ministers that it concerned
how long it takes for business cases to go from problem to
solution and whether the business case actually
reflects the best options and not.
So what insights could you share with this committee about,
uh, improvements that could be made
to business case approach?
'cause we, we've seen single stage business cases,
which actually sum up a problem
and recommended procurement solution
and move to delivery quite quickly, but it needs must, uh,
and other business cases that drag on, um, for years
and years and often produce some some pretty
underwhelming recommendations.
So what, what might you be able to share with us?
I mean, there's a range of things there.
The, the system is quite complicated at the moment.
Um, and sometimes business cases are developed with a,
you know, an end outcome in mind as opposed
to clearly identifying what the problem is
and what the range of solutions are.
Right? Um, so if you're sort of trying
to backfill a business case to suit a predetermined outcome,
that can be problematic.
Um, but doing the work early in the business case
and process, working through the options, spending time on,
on getting those costings
and things well worked through early on, mm-hmm.
Um, does save you time and money in the long run,
but there is a temptation to sort of rush it
through the process, get a business case quickly to meet a,
a budget timeframe or, or whatever.
Um, and then realize
that actually the work hasn't been done.
And so it then blows out a cost wise or needs further work.
So, um, spending that time up front in the planning is
really pays dividend down the down the line.
Okay, thanks David.
So I suppose, uh, Simon's question was sort
of the upfront importance of the business case,
and mine's sort of more at the end of project
and you've just, uh, obviously, uh, got to the report phase
with, uh, part Q
and probably the question is around, uh, capturing learnings
of that project for other, you know, like, uh,
Karen mentioned NZT, how, how do they learn of actually
what you're learning with these major,
major projects itself?
Yeah, so we, we've done lessons learned through,
through the lifecycle of the projects.
Um, give an example
of when we finished the convention center
to PI Convention Center in Christchurch.
There was some lessons learned there that we wanted
to pull across to Par Curie.
And so we, you know, we don't wait till the end
of the project to capture those, those lessons.
Uh, uh,
and with parti, for example,
we've already completed the procurement, um,
and tender process, uh, lessons learned.
So we've captured that information and data.
We create reports, so we've got a series of,
of those reports that we keep, um, that we've got in house
and we use those lessons across the procurement activities
that we do for our next project.
And the one after, are those
Reports internally focused
or are they there for external as well?
Oh, look at external, could look at them.
We haven't kind of published them externally, um,
but they are, there're an internal, there are very
critical internal focus of our own like, review and, and,
and, um, of those projects so
that we do better the next time. Okay.
Thank you. Done? Yep. Thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, so just thinking about this wrap up and wash up
and contract close out, uh,
do you have any involvement in assessing
benefits realization that the completion of a project,
because sometimes we know that clients are very happy
to have the ribbon cut and someone moves into the facility,
and then not necessarily a lot
of looking back at the original business case
and whether we got what we asked
for and what we've paid for.
Is it something you guys have an involvement in?
Uh, look, really good question.
Um, the short answer is no.
When we've finished the projects either at practical
completion, them handed, handed them over
to the asset owner, mm, the benefits
and some of these projects that we deliver
are years in the making.
They're not kind of like immediate, um, benefits.
Uh, and so it'll be over to the end owner
to capture those business case.
At the end of the day, uh, we are delivering a project
for a project owner.
They were, they own the business case.
They own the, the benefits from the business case. Mm-hmm.
We deliver, we hand the asset back that'll be best placed
to then measure the benefits of
that project against the business case in time.
Okay. Thanks. Um, I look, I'll,
I'll go to you in a sec.
Just pick up something there.
So just going back to the business case issue.
So we've, we've had quite a bit of critiquing,
probably particularly from infrastructure commission,
but from others as well about the, about the actual costing
of the projects in the first place.
And so that is part of
what you pick, you pick up at some stage.
You said that none of the budgets are under pressure.
Somebody set a budget at some point in time.
Quite often we end up with projects which somebody says,
okay, projects, we, we wanna build a, you know,
a white elephant, um, you know, how much is it gonna cost?
Somebody puts a finger in the air
and says, well, um, I think it's gonna cost this.
They've done no geotech, they've done no design,
they've done, you know, they haven't tested
the market, haven't done any of that.
And then when they actually do do that, it comes back
and says, well, it's gonna cost you three times, five times,
10 times what it was expected to cost.
Have you got any observations about that part of the process
and setting the, you know, the budgets in the first place?
Um, in some of the larger projects where, um,
the project owner owns the business case, they're going
through the business case process, we are pushing ourselves
under the commercial and management cases so
that we can challenge the, the commercials
and the financials of, of the makeup of the projects.
Uh, and the ones that we've done, we have insisted on kind
of early works doing investigation work so
that we get an idea of what the geotech, uh,
conditions are like, uh, on those projects so
that we can get better costings.
Um, we also push, um, uh, push hard on, on, uh,
contingency and making sure
that there's adequate contingencies, uh, through the,
through the lifecycle of the project, uh,
including escalation, particularly when some
of these larger projects can, can take, uh,
significant years to, to uh, go through, uh,
the design process, but also the build process
and escalation is a true cost.
So making sure that that's built into
to those project budgets.
So the ones that we've been involved in, we have, we have
what we would like to say we've influenced some of the,
the outcomes of what those financials were like.
So, so does that mean, let's say we've decided this white,
well white elephant is gonna be a hundred million dollars
as the original proposition you get involved
and say, well actually no, we think actually it needs
to be two or 300, let's say, well let's called 200.
Um, you push back on that, what's the process that they go
through as a, as a client to go, ah, okay,
well we might have an issue here.
Oh, the process would be that they, they would,
could be peer review of the costings that would go out
and get a peer review that to double check the,
the original, um, values that are in the business case.
So that's a, that's a, a quite a typical process that we
So you, but you would not feel comfortable taking on a
project, which they, you in your view?
They clearly got wrong. Uh,
We would be trying to influence, you know, we,
we provide our, our due diligence review.
If we think that the time
and costs are, um, are under pressure in a business case,
we would push hard to actually get them to re-look at that
and make sure that we've got the right, um, time
and costs in those business cases we wouldn't want
to take a project on if we, that's what I,
Okay. Okay. Cool. Ki
Thank you.
Um, at the back of your report, you've got some references
to residential developments primarily as a result of by, uh,
I'm unaware of any projects,
large scale residential
projects that you've been involved in.
So I'm keen to find, have you,
So, um, the ones that you'll be looking at,
there will be the East Frame residential project in,
in, in Christchurch.
So there was, um, five city blocks taken outta commercial,
um, uh, use and a zone residential.
Uh, we were tasked with divesting those land parcels, uh,
but making sure that, um,
and we partnered with Flex Residential, we've now partnered
with a couple of other developers there as well,
but making sure that the, the blueprint, so the outcomes
of the blueprint and the residential demands that we wanted
to see in the east frame were being met so that we have a,
a, I suppose a custodian review of design,
a custodian review of
how many people will actually then end up in that,
um, that residential.
So it was pretty high level stuff. It
Wasn't, it was high level. Okay.
That's, that's useful to know.
And prior to that, had,
had you been involved in any residential developments
As CID or Sierra?
No, Sierra was the east frame and then
Either or. Yeah.
Okay. Um, do you have the capacity currently if
that opportunity came up to be able
to look at large scale residential development? Um,
Yeah. Look, we,
um, early, early stages, uh, when, um, we were
the Christchurch centric going to national, um, agency, uh,
we, we did look and had spoken to, uh, ura mm-hmm.
And just to offer kind of services there
that built their capability and capacity internally.
Um, so there, there was a desire early on
and again, looking, looking at where,
where we could potentially go, uh,
is definitely be something that we could look at.
So possibly not quite now,
but if the opportunity came up, I think definitely.
Okay. Thank you.
Yeah. Are there any other final questions?
Sorry, just, sorry.
Um, um, if I was just, it would be going back to the,
the comment that Richard had, it would be a scale thing.
Understood. You know, you wouldn't want a small kind
of subdivision, it would need to be something of big scale.
Yeah, for sure. That at high risk, um mm-hmm.
And, uh, something that needs to kind of have that oversight
of, of a CID type of, well, I think
It's all process. I just
wanted to get that. Oh yeah,
no, that's, that's done there.
I'm not gonna propose a development of master for you.
It's so good. The, um,
but I think the, the thinking here is pretty obvious.
We've had some massive challenges and, and,
and getting out larger residential developments, um,
the need for those continue to increase.
Where are the potential possibilities moving forward?
That's, that's the gut to the question, right? Yeah.
And so you've indicated that that's possible through you?
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Two final questions, uh, from, from,
um, from my perspective.
Um, the first one is just do you do any benchmarking
of your own services against, uh, project management's?
Not, you know, if you, if you're delivering a project,
obviously a lot of people do that.
Do you do any benchmarking of what you do compared to,
to others who might try and try
and do that sort of wraparound, uh, approach
and how does that stack up?
So like, comparison to private sector sector?
Yeah, so look, yes, we know what our rates are compared
to say an all of government rates would be
for private sector to offer services, um, also what our,
our fees are as a percentage
of the overall construction value
or the project value against
what private sector would charge.
And how does that look? Well,
we, we would say we're lower.
Um, we don't have, uh, return to the investor.
Um, uh, we have to cover our cost and, and our overheads.
Um, but our, our drive is to get better infrastructure
for the government and for the taxpayer.
And so we're not looking to return profit to,
to our shareholder.
So the numbers we've seen show
that you're actually not making, um,
you're not covering your costs at the moment.
There's obviously some, there'll be some
timing issues in that as well.
Can you just walk us through that just
Quickly? So there's the central
appropriation that we've got for, um,
for some of the projects that we had
before, we were asked to become a fee for service.
And so we're still, we're building up our portfolio book
for the fee for service, and that's building over time.
So we've got given ourselves a, a two, a two year plus, um,
timeframe to get to be, um, fully cost recoverable.
Okay, that's cool. But we need, we need more projects,
bigger projects to help us with that.
Yeah. Okay, cool. Um, and look, the last one is you,
we've got mentioned there of the Canterbury Museum project,
which is, um, below the, that'll be
below you a hundred billion by looks of it.
Um, but that's, is that
because that's residual outta
Christchurch? Is that what It's,
So that's a little, um, uh, there was some funding
that was given to the Canterbury Museum
for the seismic upgrade of foundations. It sort of,
It sort of flows on the Christchurch earthquakes.
So yeah, we, we just became a default manager
of the funding from central government through to, um,
Canterbury Museum and to make sure
that they were only spending it on the scope
that the central government had agreed
and their agreement with them.
So we, we are managing
of the funds not managing that project.
Oh, okay. 'cause that
project's got some challenges int it,
Doesn't it? Yeah, so we're not
involved in,
and this is just, um, they invoice us
and say they've completed X amount of work.
We, we, we assess whether
or not that X work is associated with the funding
that central government has given so they can't
Go use that something else. Yeah. Okay.
An assurance piece. No, look, thank you very much.
I think we, we appreciate that.
I don't see any other questions. No. All good.
Thank you both very much. We really appreciate it.
Thanks very much. Have a good, thank you.